---
layout: single
title: "Hashing"
date:   2023-03-07 17:29
description: Hashing in Java.

categories:

- Java

tags:

- Java, hashing

---

#### Hashing in Java collections

Generally, hashing is widely used in algorithms, data structures, and cryptography. In Java, probably most known case is its application into some implementations of Java Set interface and Map interface - two main interfaces of Java collections.
We are often required to use HashSet over List implementation where possible due to HashSet lookup speed. Also, HashMap seems to be the most widely used Map implementation in Java.
In this article, we will take a general look at hashing in Java. Let's start with recalling some important data structures and the importancy of ```equals()``` and ```hashCode()``` methods.
Then we will discuss when and how hashing is used in Java collections. Last but not least, hashing function features and its usage in cryptography and security will also be mentionned.

#### Set (interface) - recapitulation

Main features of Java Set interface:

- [x] uniqueness of items, item which is already in a Set will be omitted when adding
- [x] no duplicates
- [x] items added to every set must at least implement equals()
- [x] Set has exactly the same interface as Collection
- [x] does not guarantee any particular order - **but it is not a random order, so with every fetch it can return elements in the same order!**
- [x] faster than List

| Set implementation | Features                                                                 | Requirements         |
|--------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| HashSet            | lookup speed                                                             | equals(), hashCode() |
| TreeSet            | ordered Set backed by a tree                                             | equals(), Comparable |
| LinkedHashSet      | lookup speed of a HashSet, keeps the insertion order using a linked list | equals(), hashCode() |

#### Map (interface) - recapitulation

The implementations and featurs of the Map interface in Java:

| Map implementation | Features                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| HashMap            | based on a hash table<br/>constant-time performance: insert and search<br/>performance can be adjusted using constructors<br/>capacity and load factor can be set                                                                                                                                                                         |
| LinkedHashMap      | insertion order or **least-recently-used (LRU)** order (option)<br/>slightly slower than HashMap<br/>faster iteration - using LinkedList mechanism<br/>can be configured (constructor) to use LRU algorithm based on accesses: not accessed items appear at the front of the list<br/>LRU is good periodic cleanup in order to save space |
| TreeMap            | implementation based on a **red-black tree**<br/>keys (and entries) in sorted order (Comparable or Comparator)<br/>only Map with the subMap( ) method, returns a portion of the tree                                                                                                                                                      |
| WeakHashMap        | map of weak keys that allow objects referred to by the map to be released<br/> no references to a particular key held outside the map = key may be garbage collected                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ConcurrentHashMap  | thread-safe Map, no synchronization locking                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| IdentityHashMap    | HashMap that uses == instead of equals() to compare keys<br/>not for general use                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Clear explanation of IdentityHashMap found in Cay Horstmann's *Core Java. Vol I: Fundamentals* (shortened and slightly re-edited):

> IdentityHashMap is a really special case. Hash values for the keys should not be computed by the hashCode() method 
> but by the System.identityHashCode() method. It is the same method that Object.hashCode() uses to compute a hash code from
> the object’s memory address. Also, for comparison of objects, the IdentityHashMap uses == , not equals().
> In other words, different key objects are considered distinct even if they have equal contents (due to hashCode() and equals() implementation they are using). 
> This class is useful for implementing object traversal algorithms, such as object serialization, in which you want to keep track of which objects have already been traversed.

Important: when a custom object (user-defined class) is used as a key in HashMap, **it should implement ```equals()``` and ```hashCode()``` methods** - otherwise, it won't work properly!
Results may be unpredictable. The same is true when custom collection container is designed by a user.

#### equals()

Why correct defining of ```equals()``` method is important? 

All objects of any class implicitly inherit ```equals()``` method from Object class. 
It's a part of **single-root hierarchy**, a term describing that all objects in Java inherit from the Object class.
In other words, all Java classes, no matter if in-built or programatically-created, implicitly extend the Object class and inherit its methods.

At this root level, in the Object class, ```equals()``` works like ```==```, simply comparing references. So for most of everyday cases, it won't work properly.

> The Object class provides some common methods to all subclasses. It has nine instance methods (excluding overloaded methods) which can be divided into four groups:
> threads synchronization: wait, notify, notifyAll;
> object identity: hashCode, equals;
> object management: finalize, clone, getClass;
> human-readable representation: toString;

> Although an enum is a reference type, two variables can be correctly compared using both ways: the method equals() and the operator ==

> Good practice says: when we override the ```equals()``` method, we should also override ```hashCode()```!

---
Requirements that should be met by every good ```equals()``` method:

1) **Reflexivity**: for any non-null reference value x, x.equals(x) should return true.

2) **Symmetry**: for any non-null reference values x and y, x.equals(y) should return true if and only if y.equals(x) returns true.

3) **Transitivity**: for any non-null reference values x, y, and z, if x.equals(y) returns true and y.equals(z) returns true, then x.equals(z) should return true.

4) **Consistency**: for any non-null reference values x and y, multiple invocations of x.equals(y) consistently return true or consistently return false, provided that no information used in equals comparisons on the objects is modified.

5) **Non-nullity**: for any non-null reference value x, x.equals(null) should return false.

> Mnemonic to remember the rules: RED-REFLEXIVE SYMMETRIC TRANSIT-TRAIN CONSIST ON NON-NULL CARS

---
**How to write a custom, good ```equals()``` method:**

First, select some fields to use them in comparison and then perform three tests inside the ```equals()``` method:

1) if this and other object have the same reference, the objects are equal, otherwise - go to step 2;

2) if the other object is null or has an unsuitable type, the objects are not equal, otherwise - go to step 3;

3) if all selected fields are equal, the objects are equal, otherwise, they are not equal;

4) If you do not perform all the tests, the equals method will work properly in some cases.


#### hashCode()

Why correct defining of ```hashCode()``` is important?

The Object class ```hashCode()``` just returns memory address, which is not good if it should return some meaningful value.

---

**What are the requirements for good ```hashCode()``` implementation?**

1) Whenever it is invoked on the same object more than once during an execution of a Java application, the hashCode method must consistently return the same integer value, provided no information used in equals comparisons on the object is modified.

2) If two objects are equal according to the equals() method, then calling the hashCode() method on each of the two objects must produce the same integer result.

3) It is not required for unequal objects to produce distinct hash codes. However, the programmer should be aware that producing distinct integer results for unequal objects may improve the performance of hash tables.

```Hash code``` generation should not be based on mutable data. ```hashCode()``` method must be fast and meaningful: it should rely on values that indentifies the object in a meaningful way.
The identity of the object should be clearly resolved. The generated code does not need to be unique, but hashing should be fast - that is the importancy of hashing.

Joshua Bloch in his *Effective Java* describes potential pitfalls related to both methods, and shows the recipee for a good implementation.

#### Hashing for speed

So ```hashCode()``` method is **hashing function** that produces numeric value (called **a hash code**) pointing to some value, placed under some index in an array.
This array is called **hash table**. 

Example:

Let's say that an object has a hash code of 64, and other has 128. The first is placed in an array under index 64. The other under index 128. 

> This is just a simplistic example - in fact, the number is further processed: the real value is modulo of hash code by the total number of buckets.

Example: if hash code value is 7628, and there is 128 buckets, the object will be stored under index 108:

```text
76268 % 128 = 108
```

When a searching operation is performed, there is no need to use searching algorithm to search for a given object among others, nor to iterate through whole array.
Once it is know that we are looking for an object, of which ```hashCode()``` returns 76268, we can access the object under the index of 108.

#### Even distribution problem

A correctly designed hashing function should result in an even distribution of values within a hash table. If the values tend to cluster 
(some areas of the hash table are heavily loaded while others are empty), it may affect the speed.

#### Collisions

If a bucket is already filled, hash collision is happening.

**A perfect hashing junction** is a case when there is a fixed number of values, so that a collision is impossible. According to Eckel:

> The case of a perfect hashing function is implemented in the Java SE5 EnumMap and EnumSet, because an enum defines a fixed number of instances.

On the other hand, **collision** is when different objects have the same hash code. Normally, the collisions are handled by **external chaining**:

> The array doesn’t point directly to a value, but instead to a list of values. These values are searched in a linear fashion using the equals( ) method. 
> Of course, this aspect of the search is much slower, but  if the hash function is good, there will only be a few values in each slot. 
> So instead of searching through the entire list, you quickly jump to a slot where you only have to compare a few entries to find the value. 
> This is much faster, which is why the HashMap is so quick.

The hash table in Java is an array of LinkedLists, prepared for future collisions. Each bucket contain list of slots for values (objects) that have colliding hash codes.
In case of hash collsion, the new object will be compared with all objects in that bucket (in the list "attached" to the bucket) to check if it is already present.
Set is not accepting duplicates, so if the object is already there, it will be skipped when added again. If it is a really new object, it will be stored in the list.

> As of Java SE 8, the buckets change from linked lists into balanced binary trees when they get full, for better performance.
> It is useful when malicious code tries to flood a hash table with many values that have identical hash codes.

#### Efficiency, load factor and rehashing

Getting back to the hash table - the slots are called **buckets**. How many buckets should be in terms of efficiency?
The length of a hash table should be either prime number or power of two. Again, Eckel:

> As it turns out, a prime number is not actually the ideal size for hash buckets (evidence for this isn’t conclusive), and recent hashed implementations in
> Java use a power-of-two size (after extensive testing). Division or remainder is the slowest operation on a modern
> processor. With a power-of-two hash table length, masking can be used instead of division. Since get( ) is by far the most
> common operation, the % is a large part of the cost, and the power-of-two approach eliminates this (but may also affect
> some hashCode( ) methods).

The standard library uses bucket counts that are powers of 2, with a default of 16 . Any custom hash table size is rounded to the next power of 2.
According to Horstmann, bucket number should reach from 75% to 150% of the expected element count. 

Load factor is important.

**Load factor** of a hash table says to which extent the table is filled with values (0 is empty table, 0.5 is half-full, 1 is full).

So the less, the better? 

Not necessarily. 

Hash table with small load has fewer chances of collisions, hence it is optimal for insertions and lookups. On the other hand,
it will  be slower when traversing with an iterator. HashMap and HashSet have constructors to specify the load factor. 
When the load factor is reached, the container will automatically increase the capacity - the number of buckets - by roughly doubling it 
and will redistribute the existing objects into the new set of buckets, which is called **rehashing**.
The default load factor of Java HashMap is 0.75, which is considered to be a good trade-off between time and space complexity.
Higher load factor means less space is required by the table, but at the same time it increases the lookup cost (time complexity).
This lookup is often performed, for example when invoking ```get()``` and ```put()``` methods.

#### What is this hashing for, after all?

To be continued in part 2.

---
Further reading:

*Core Java, Volume I: Fundamentals*, 12th Edition, Cay S. Horstmann, Oracle, 2021

*Thinking in Java 4th Edition*, Bruce Eckel, Pearson, 2006

*Effective Java, 3rd Edition*, Joshua Bloch, 2018, chapter III, item 10 & 11

[freeCodeCamp: Introduction to hashing](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/what-is-hashing/)

[Baeldung: Deep Dive into Hashing](https://www.baeldung.com/cs/hashing)